We've just
received the IDF
initial findings on the Israeli
strike that killed
seven world
central kitchen workers in Gaza
on Monday.
The internal investigation
has found Israeli forces
believe they were targeting
Hamas, end quote,
mistakenly assumed to Hamas gunmen
were in the vehicles in the aid
convoy
Israel has now fired
two military commanders.
Let's get right to CNN's
Nic Robertson, who joins us now
live from Jerusalem.
Can you walk us through the findings?
It's a couple of pages.
And what do you see that might be missing
when you look
at some of the details of this
Yeah, sure.
This is a sequence of events
that the IDF has laid out
that they say led
to this misidentification
of misclassification
of the events on the ground. They say
the IDF
spotted a gunman getting on aid trucks.
We're talking about trucks here,
the big vehicles
that carry
the actual pallets
and containers of food
and other humanitarian supplies.
And then the IDF says they saw
another gunman. Again, a single.
So we're talking about two gunmen.
They're saying they see
get on the aid truck or aid trucks.
Then the convoy goes into the warehouse
and the IDF says
what happened
next is where the misidentification,
a missed clarification happens
that the IDF
then tracked the SUV as the vehicles
leaving the warehouse
after the aid trucks had been there.
The IDF says
they didn't realize these SUVs
worked for the world Central Kitchen,
despite the fact
these were
markings are clearly emblazoned
on those vehicles.
The IDF
then says that
those vehicles were engaged
because the IDF believed that the gunmen
were inside those SUVs now no longer
on the aid trucks
after they've been to the warehouse.
But inside the SUV.
Now, the IDF says
this should not have happened.
It was against their protocols
and against their rules of engagement.
And they have now dismissed a major
who was directly involved in the incident
and the brigade chief of staff,
a reserve
colonel and disciplined
the the brigade commander as well.
Now, the World
Central Kitchen say that it is good
that the IDF has acknowledged
and accepted responsibility
It's good
that they have taken disciplinary action.
However,
they're saying that
this is these outrageous killings
that what the IDF has said so far
on what they've done
is really of cold comfort.
They said that the IDF report shows
that the World Central Kitchen workers
were doing
everything
that they should have been doing.
But this, of course, leaves many,
many questions unanswered.
How could it be assumed
that the gunmen who been on
trucks were now inside?
We're talking about two gunmen
could be inside
three different vehicles
and so many more unanswered questions.
Yeah, that's true.
We will wait to see what happens.
I know the World Central Kitchen
founder has asked for
an independent investigation
that is not done by the IDF.
I do want to talk to you
about something that has just happened
after this conversation
between Netanyahu and President Biden.
The aid crossings into northern Gaza
are opening up and a dedicated port
Israel says will be available
for aid shipments.
What else are you learning there?
Yeah, I think
it's kind of
key to look at what
the White House is saying here.
U.S.
policy is going to be determined
on how Israel moves forward
from these statements.
And we heard the same from Secretary
Blinken today.
And it's what Palestinians
are telling us as well.
It's one thing
to hear it
from the Israeli government,
particularly when they're pushed
by the United States to do this.
But let's see the reality on the ground
and the context.
And that, of course,
is that back in January this year,
the Israeli government
said that
it was okay for food shipments
to come in
through the port of Ashdod,
which is 20 miles from the Erez crossing.
However, those food shipments
when they arrived
were then blocked by protesters
We already know that elements
with inside Netanyahu's
Prime Minister Netanyahu's
government, the right wing
elements, are saying
that they didn't agree with this move
by the Israeli government.
This set the scene
for, again,
potential protests
to potentially stop convoys.
It hasn't happened,
but this is why the White House
will look closely.
And another point of reference here
is that when he was here
in early
February, Secretary of State
Antony Blinken told the Israelis
that they should be opening the Erez
crossing in the north of Gaza
because that's
where the humanitarian situation
is most desperate.
That's where people are
literally dying of starvation.
We just got a figure from people
on the ground there today.
You know how much it is
for one kilo, £2.2 of potatoes today.
22 bucks.
22 bucks for £2 of potatoes.
That's the price of potatoes.
That's why people are starving.
And in the north of Gaza right now,
and that's why
there's going to be so much scrutiny
to see
if this actually happens, that the U.S.
has called so many times
for errors to be opened. Yes.
And the
UN agency
that's looking at
famine says famine is imminent.
They're a manmade famine.
Nic Robertson,
thank you so much for all your reporting.
Okay,
so this report also comes out
as Israel is now,
as you guys were just
discussing, opening,
planning to open another crossing
into Gaza
to allow more humanitarian
aid to flow in.
And this is after that phone call
between President Biden
and the Israeli prime minister,
where Biden issued an ultimatum
that Netanyahu
takes specific and concrete
and measurable steps
to protect aid workers
to or risk losing U.S. support.
CNN's Arlette
Science is at the White House
now with much more on on this.
Arlette,
what are you hearing this
morning from the White House about this
initial review,
this initial analysis,
this initial report
coming out about that strike?
Well, Kate, officials
here at the White House
were closely waiting
and watching for this initial report
from the Israelis
as they're trying
to get some further explanation
for what exactly led to that strike
on that world central kitchen convoy.
It comes on the heels
of a very blunt conversation
between President
Biden and Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu yesterday,
where Biden warned
Israel would face consequences
if they do not do more
to protect civilians
and ease the humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
Now, in that phone
call, a senior administration
official tells CNN
that Netanyahu admitted
that the IDF was to blame
for the strike on this convoy.
And this morning,
we have some interesting new language
from Secretary of State
Antony Blinken,
who ahead of the Israelis report
being released
said that there must be a thorough,
independent investigation
and full of accountability
for what happened. Take a listen
It's also
critical that we see
an independent,
thorough
and fully publicized investigation
into the killing of the World
Central Kitchen
team
who were performing heroic work
under the most difficult circumstances
in trying to get assistance
to people who so desperately need it.
So we're looking to see
that investigation.
We're looking to see a public accounting
and we're looking to see accountability
in its wake.
You know, this all comes on
the heels of what was
could be
one of the most consequential phone calls
of this conflict.
Between President Biden and Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
in that phone call.
Netanyahu assured the president
that Israel would be trying
to take steps to prevent incidents
like this from happening again.
That's according to a senior
administration official.
One thing that the two men agreed on
was that more needed to be done
to be able
to track
where these humanitarian aid
workers are in Gaza.
There's also
was a discussion
about the need to get more humanitarian
aid in to the enclave,
and that was through the opening
of these access points.
As Nic was talking about earlier,
just in the hours after this call
between Biden and Netanyahu,
Israel approved the opening of that Erez
crossing in northern Gaza.
Now, one thing
that Secretary Blinken
and other officials
here at the White House have stressed
is that while they welcomed
the opening of this crossing,
while they open
welcome the ports,
they also want to see
the metrics of this,
see how many aid trucks
are actually getting in and see
how much assistance
is actually being distributed
to the American
to the Palestinian people.
But really,
this call between Biden
and Netanyahu will be closely watched
since it was one of the starkest warnings
that he's offered
that Biden has given to Netanyahu
about the way
that they're conducting their operations,
saying that things need to change
all the time at the White House for us.
Thank you so much live.